# Kathy Labriola

Abstract: This collection documents the labor activities of Kathy Labriola, licensed vocational nurse, union activist, and community organizer. The records comprise newsletters, flyers, notes, correspondence, articles, clippings, and promotional materials collected and generated by Labriola in her role as shop steward for Service Employees International Union (SEIU), Local 250, and through her involvement in three union-related committees: the AIDS Education Committee, the Southern Africa Solidarity Committee, and the Committee for a Democratic Union (CDU). Other materials pertain to Labriola's role as a commissioner on the City of Berkeley Labor Commission, as well as her involvement in the fight against the two-gate system in the San Francisco Bay Area construction industry. 

Kathy Labriola was born in New Jersey and graduated as a licensed vocational nurse (LVN) from Bergen Pines School of Nursing in 1974. That same year she moved to California and passed the California State Board exam. Her involvement in labor unions started in the mid-1970s when, while working in convalescent hospitals in Berkeley, she experienced first-hand the low wages and unstable work conditions of the hospital employees and the anti-union stance of the hospital administrators. Labriola herself was laid off from her job as an LVN at Claremont Convalescent Hospital after attempting to unionize fellow workers.

A later job at a nursing home with a union contract introduced Labriola to SEIU Local 250. Her interest in union issues deepened and she eventually took on the role of shop steward. During this time, her disenchantment with the inner workings of the union grew as she witnessed the corruption and incompetence of the "old boy" network of union leadership. In an effort to bring about change, Labriola joined the Committee for a Democratic Union (CDU), a rank and file caucus committed to union reform.

Labriola became heavily involved in two committees founded by Local 250 members: the AIDS Education Committee, and the Southern Africa Solidarity Committee. From 1978 to 1988, as part of the Southern Africa Solidarity Committee, Labriola distributed educational literature, organized fundraisers, and lobbied the United States government for sanctions against the South African government. In her role as co-founder and committee member for the Local 250 AIDS Education Committee, Labriola conducted workshops and trainings with hospital staff on how to safely care for people with AIDS, and co-wrote AIDS and the Health Care Worker.

In January 1987 SEIU placed Local 250 into trusteeship, dissolving the Executive Board and the Board of Trustees and effectively ending Labriola's position on both. A year later, as a result of a merger between Alta Bates Hospital and Herrick Hospital, Labriola was one of a hundred nurses laid off from their jobs. At that point Labriola's membership with Local 250 ceased, although her relationship with CDU continued for another year.

From 1986 to 1994 Labriola served as a commissioner on the City of Berkeley Labor Commission. As part of her position she wrote a Labor Bill of Rights supporting workers in Berkeley, and was instrumental in representing labor interests in the Miles Cutter Development Agreement and in the City of Berkeley's plan for the redevelopment of West Berkeley. Labriola also played a role in the Rank And File Committee Against The 2-Gate. The committee, formed in the early 1980s by rank and file construction workers, protested construction companies that created two separate gates to a job site in order to avoid hiring union workers.

Labriola attended the University of California at Berkeley and in 1980 was awarded a B.A. in Comparative Government. Her honors thesis was titled The Influence of Feminism on American Women in the 1970s. Labriola currently works as a counselor in Berkeley, California. 

<https://oac.cdlib.org/findaid/ark:/13030/c83t9mjr/entire_text/>